Three books changed my life as a programmer. <cite>Kernighan1981</cite> taught
me that I could do more than just write software---I could *design* it---while
<cite>Glass2002</cite> taught me that we could study software and the software
development process just as we would study anything else in engineering, and
that by doing so we could prove or invalidate claims about what works and what
doesn't.

In between them I read <cite>Hunt1999</cite>, as did many other programmers of
my generation. For most of us, it was the first time someone had described the
craft of software construction in a way that made sense. When I began
supervising undergraduate student projects at the University of Toronto in the
early 2000s, I referred to it over and over again.

Looking at it and at its twentieth anniversary edition <cite>Thomas2019</cite>
now, I am struck by how useful its advice continues to be, but I'm also struck
by what *isn't* there. How do you run a meeting in a way that ensures everyone
is heard? After working in and around programming for forty years, I believe
knowing that is more useful than knowing what design by contract is (<span
x="design"></span>). Why and how are tech companies so hostile to women, people
of color, and members of the LGBT community? The evidence that they are is much
stronger than the evidence for the benefits of test-driven development (<span
x="process"></span>).  And given how online platforms have fueled radicalization
and disinformation, shouldn't every book on how to be a better programmer at
least mention them?

This book can't cover everything that those three did, but if you are an
undergraduate student embarking on a semester-long software project as part of a
team, it will give you the tools you need to succeed. Its aim is to teach you
how to be a *compassionate programmer*---one who cares as much about the
well-being of their colleagues and users as they do about their own. This focus
is not purely selfless: treating other people as if they are as important as
yourself also makes your life easier, not least because you-in-the-future is one
of the people you're helping.
